research-article

2016

658637

<!-- image -->

## Increasing Transparency Through a Multiverse Analysis

Sara Steegen 1 , Francis Tuerlinckx 1 , Andrew Gelman 2 , and Wolf Vanpaemel 1

1 KU Leuven, University of Leuven and  2 Columbia University

## Abstract

Empirical research inevitably includes constructing a data set by processing raw data into a form ready for statistical analysis. Data processing often involves choices among several reasonable options for excluding, transforming, and coding data. We suggest that instead of performing only one analysis, researchers could perform a multiverse analysis, which involves performing all analyses across the whole set of alternatively processed data sets corresponding to a large set of reasonable scenarios. Using an example focusing on the effect of fertility on religiosity and political attitudes, we show that analyzing a single data set can be misleading and propose a multiverse analysis as an alternative practice. A multiverse analysis offers an idea of how much the conclusions change because of arbitrary choices in data construction and gives pointers as to which choices are most consequential in the fragility of the result.

## Keywords

multiverse analysis, arbitrary choices, data processing, good research practices, transparency, selective reporting

Psychology has been stirred by dramatic revelations of questionable  research  practices  (John,  Loewenstein,  &amp; Prelec, 2012), implausible findings (Wagenmakers, Wetzels,  Borsboom,  &amp;  van  der  Maas,  2011),  and  low reproducibility (Open Science Collaboration, 2015; Yong, 2012). The resulting crisis of confidence has led to a wide array of recommendations for improving research practices. Commonly cited advice includes replication, high power, copiloting, adjusting the alpha level, focusing on estimation rather than on testing, and adopting Bayesian statistics (e.g., Asendorpf et al., 2013; Bakker, van Dijk, &amp; Wicherts,  2012;  Johnson,  2013;  Wagenmakers  et  al., 2011). A major class of recommendations involves a call for increased transparency in reporting, including preregistration of hypotheses and analyses, clearly distinguishing  between  confirmatory  and  exploratory  findings, disclosing all conditions and measures, sharing data, and sharing research materials (e.g., Chambers, 2013; LeBel, Campbell, &amp; Loving, in press; Morey et al., 2016; Nosek et al., 2015; Nosek &amp; Bar-Anan, 2012; Simmons, Nelson, &amp; Simonsohn, 2012; Wagenmakers, Wetzels, Borsboom, van der Maas, &amp; Kievit, 2012). In this article, we use a worked example to suggest that  research  transparency can further be increased by performing what we term a multiverse analysis .

A multiverse analysis starts from the observation that data  used  in  an  analysis  are  usually  not  just  passively recorded  in  an  experiment  or  an  observational  study. Rather, data are to a certain extent actively constructed. Data  construction  occurs  when  the  raw  data  are  converted  into  a  form  ready  for  analysis.  When  preparing their data for analysis, researchers often take several processing  steps,  such  as  discretization  of  variables  into categories,  combination  of  variables,  transformation  of variables,  data  exclusion,  and  so  on.  These  processing steps  typically  come  with  many  researcher  degrees  of freedom (Simmons, Nelson, &amp; Simonsohn, 2011), as there are often several options in each step. As a result, raw data  do  not  uniquely  give  rise  to  a  single  data  set  for analysis  but  rather  to  multiple  alternatively  processed data  sets,  depending  on  the  specific  combination  of choices-a many worlds or multiverse of  data  sets.  As each data set in this data multiverse can lead to a different statistical result, the data multiverse directly implies a multiverse of statistical results.

## Corresponding Author:

Wolf Vanpaemel, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Tiensestraat 102 Leuven 3000, Belgium E-mail: wolf.vanpaemel@ppw.kuleuven.be

<!-- image -->

Perspectives on Psychological Science 2016, Vol. 11(5) 702  -712 © The Author(s) 2016 Reprints and permissions: sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav DOI: 10.1177/1745691616658637 pps.sagepub.com

<!-- image -->

Researchers often select a single (or a few) data processing choices and then present this as the only analysis that ever would have been done. This practice of selective reporting would not be problematic if the single data set under consideration is processed based on sound and justifiable choices. However, choosing among the possibilities during data processing is often arbitrary, and justifications  for  the  choices  are  typically  lacking.  For example, partitioning a variable into two or more discrete categories  often  involves  an  arbitrary  split  point,  there can be various reasonable combinations or transformations of variables, and there are different sensible guidelines  to  determine  which  data  points  to  exclude.  This multiplicity of reasonable processing steps gives rise to a multiverse of reasonable data sets, which directly implies that  there  are  several  reasonable  statistical  results.  Any arbitrariness  that  is  present  in  the  data  construction  is inherited by the statistical result.

When privileging a single arbitrary data set from the multiverse of possible data sets, the multiverse of statistical results is ignored. The inevitable arbitrariness in the data  and  the  sensitivity  of  the  result  is  hidden  to  the reader, which makes the interpretation of the single result hard at best and impossible at worst. In the light of this problem of selective reporting, we propose to use a multiverse analysis as an alternative to a single data set analysis. Such a multiverse analysis has two goals: It enhances transparency  by  providing  a  detailed  picture  of  the robustness or fragility  of  statistical  results,  and  it  helps identifying the key choices that conclusions hinge on.

A multiverse analysis involves performing the analysis of  interest  across  the  whole  set  of  data  sets  that  arise from different reasonable choices for data processing. It can be seen as a systematic and organized extension of outlier  analysis (see,  e.g.,  Ramsey  &amp;  Schafer,  2012; Simmons  et  al.,  2011),  which  involves  examining  the robustness  of  one's  conclusions  with  and  without  the elimination of outlying observations. A multiverse analysis displays the stability or robustness of a finding, not only  across  different  options  for  exclusion  criteria,  but across different options for all steps in data processing. It is closely related to the idea of a garden of forking paths in  data  analysis  (Gelman  &amp;  Loken,  2014),  which  highlights that the one-to-many mapping from scientific theories to statistical hypotheses typically leads to an implicit, potential multiple comparison problem. The multiverse analysis focuses on one particular aspect of this multiple comparison issue, related to data processing.

In the remainder of this article, we demonstrate a multiverse analysis using data from  recently  published research. We first describe the results of an analysis focusing  on  a  single  constructed  data  set  only.  Next,  we describe  a  multiverse  analysis  based  on  the  same  raw data  and  highlight  how  the  multiverse  analysis  reveals the impact of arbitrary processing choices on the statistical results.

## Demonstration

Our demonstration of a multiverse analysis focuses on data collected by Durante, Rae, and Griskevicius (2013). These  authors  conducted  two  studies  investigating  the effect of fertility on religiosity and political attitudes. We selected these studies simply to illustrate how a multiverse analysis can help researchers better understand the extent to which their results depend on various data processing choices. First, we describe the raw data that were collected  in  both  studies.  Next,  we  describe  the  single data set analysis reported by Durante et al. (2013). Finally, we show what these authors could have found had they performed a multiverse analysis of their data rather than the single data set analysis. A more detailed description of the raw and processed data is provided in the online Supplemental Materials.

## Data collection

A total of 275 women participated in Study 1. Each participant was asked to answer three religiosity items using a  9-point  scale.  Further,  each  participant  was  asked  to indicate  the  typical  length  of  her  menstrual  cycle,  the start date of her last menstrual period, and the start date of  her  previous  menstrual  period.  In  addition,  each woman indicated how sure she was about these two start dates,  using  a  9-point  scale.  Finally,  each  woman  was asked to indicate her current romantic relationship status with the following four response options: (1) not dating/ romantically involved with anyone , (2) dating or involved with  only  one  partner ,  (3) engaged  or  living  with  my partner , and (4) married .

Quite laudably, Durante et al. (2013) performed a second  study  to  replicate  the  findings  in  Study  1  and  to extend them to political attitudes. In Study 2, 502 women participated. The main difference with Study 1 was that participants were also asked to answer five items assessing  fiscal  political  attitudes,  five  items  assessing  social political  attitudes  (using  a  7-point  scale  for  these  10 items), one item assessing their voting preference (Mitt Romney or Barack Obama), and one item assessing their campaign donation preference (Mitt Romney or Barack Obama). Another difference with Study 1 was that participants  also  indicated  the  expected  start  date  of  their next menstrual period.

## Single data set analysis

The data collected in the procedure described above are not  ready  for  analysis  yet.  Preparing  the  data  set  for

analysis requires several processing steps and decisions. We describe the different data processing steps taken by Durante et al. (2013) to construct a single data set for each study, and the main results and conclusions that follow from this data set. The results of these single data set analyses are identical to the ones reported by Durante et al. (2013).

Constructing the single data set. In order to construct a  single  data  set  ready  for  analysis,  the  following  data processing steps are taken.

Religiosity .  The three religiosity items are averaged to create a religiosity score.

Fiscal  and  social  political  attitudes .  The  five  fiscal political  attitudes  items  are  averaged  to  create  a  fiscal political attitudes score, and the five social political attitudes items are averaged to create a social political attitudes score.

Fertility .  Participants  are  classified  in  a  high  or  low fertility group based on their cycle day. Participants with cycle days ranging from 7 to 14 are assigned to the high fertility group, whereas participants with cycle days ranging from 17 to 25 are assigned to the low fertility group. A woman's cycle day is based on the number of days before next  menstrual  onset,  which  in  turn  is  based  on  cycle length, which is computed as the difference between the start date of the woman's last menstrual period and the start date of the woman's previous menstrual period.

Relationship  status .  Participants  are  assigned  to  a single  or  committed  relationship  group.  Women  who selected response Option 1 or 2 on the relationship status item are assigned to the group of single women, whereas women who selected response Option 3 or 4 are assigned to the group of women in committed relationships.

Exclusion criteria .  The assignment of the participants to  a  high  or  low  fertility  group  automatically  excludes women whose cycle days are not in the high or low fertility range. Beyond this exclusion, no other participants are excluded.

Deriving the single statistical result. Based on this single  data  set,  the  effect  of  fertility  on  religiosity  and political attitudes is examined, with relationship status as an interacting variable. For religiosity, an ANOVA reveals a  Fertility  ×  Relationship  status  interaction,  in  both studiesF (1,159) = 6.46, p = 0.012, in Study 1; F (1,299) = 8.21, p = 0.004, in Study 2-indicating that single women reported less religiosity if they were in the high-fertility group than if they were in the low-fertility group, whereas women in relationships reported more religiosity if they were in the high-fertility group than in the low-fertility group.  Regarding  fiscal  political  attitudes,  an  ANOVA reveals no significant effects of fertility status. Regarding social political attitudes, a Fertility × Relationship status interaction is found, F (1,299) = 12.26, p = .001, indicating that  single  women  reported  less  socially  conservative attitudes if they were in the high-fertility group than if they were in the low-fertility group, whereas women in relationships showed the opposite pattern. Finally, logistic regression reveals a significant Fertility × Relationship status interaction both for voting preferences, b = -1.62, Wald (1) = 8.35, p = .004, and donation preferences, b = -1.71, Wald (1)  =  9.30, p =  .002,  indicating  that  single women were more likely to vote and donate for Obama if they were in the high-fertility group than if they were in  the  low-fertility  group,  whereas  women  in  relationships were more likely to vote and donate for Romney if they were in the high-fertility group than if they were in the low-fertility group.

## Multiverse analysis

The different data processing steps in the single data set analysis are far from the only reasonable ones (see also Harris, Pashler, &amp; Mickes, 2014). This means that the data set used in the single data set analysis corresponds to just a single data set in a much larger multiverse of data sets. More importantly, this also means that the statistical result based on the single data set reflects only one possible outcome in a multiverse of possible outcomes. Without knowing which other statistical results could have reasonably been observed, it is impossible to evaluate the robustness of the finding. Transparency could be increased by performing, for each research question, the same analysis for all possible data sets, defined by the reasonable choices for data processing. This is the multiverse analysis.

We  will  first  construct  the  multiverse  of  data  sets, which consists of all data sets that could be obtained by combining different reasonable data processing choices. Then, we analyze each data set in this data multiverse separately, leading to the multiverse of statistical results. In this multiverse analysis, we consider choices in data processing that Durante et al. (2013) might themselves have considered had they performed a multiverse analysis rather than a single data set analysis. To increase the likelihood  that  these  authors  would  have  considered these choices reasonable, the different processing choices we  use  are  based  on  previously  published  studies  by Durante  and  her  collaborators,  where  possible.  In  the same spirit, we followed Durante et al. (2013) in dichotomizing  the  relationship  status  and  fertility  variables,

although the practice of dichotomization is not without criticism  (e.g.,  MacCallum,  Zhang,  Preacher,  &amp;  Rucker, 2002). 1  Further, the vicarious character of our multiverse analysis  implies  that,  for  the  construction  of  the  multiverse of results, we will adopt the statistical analyses that were used by Durante et al. (2013), including the focus on p values and the adoption of .05 as the significance level. We stress that this is only a hypothetical illustration of a multiverse analysis. Our multiverse is only a subset of a larger multiverse of possible data-processing choices, and we can not rule out that Durante et al.'s (2013) actual multiverse might have been different.

Constructing  the  data  multiverse. The  first  step involves listing the different reasonable choices during each step of data processing. Table 1 summarizes five arbitrary choices in data processing, both in Study 1 and 2, and the different reasonable options we will consider for each arbitrary choice. Option (a) always corresponds to the processing choice made by Durante et al. (2012), while the remaining options correspond to alternative choices they could have reasonably made. In the following sections, we describe the alternative options in detail.

Fertility .  First, the classification of women into a high or low fertility group based on cycle day can be done using several reasonable alternatives: assigning women with  cycle  days  6-14  to  the  high  fertility  group  and women with cycle days 17-27 to the low fertility group (Durante, Griskevicius, Hill, Perilloux, &amp; Li, 2011), days 9-17 for high fertility and 18-25 for low fertility (Durante, Griskevicius, Simpson, Cantú, &amp; Li, 2012), days 8-14 for high fertility and 1-7 and 15-28 for low fertility (Durante, Griskevicius, Cantú, &amp; Simpson, 2014), and days 9-17 for high fertility and 1-8 and 18-28 for low fertility (Durante &amp; Arsena, 2015).

Second,  there  are  different  reasonable  alternatives for estimating a woman's next menstrual onset, which is  an  intermediate  step  in  determining  cycle  day.  A reasonable  way  to  estimate  next  menstrual  onset  is based on the women's reported estimate of their typical cycle length (Thornhill &amp; Gangestad, 1999). Another reasonable  strategy  for  determining  the  onset  of  the next period involves using the self-reported expected start  date  of  the  next  menstrual  period  (Haselton  &amp; Miller, 2006). 2

Relationship  status .  There  are  at  least  two  reasonable alternative options to the dichotomization of women's relationship status, stemming from the ambiguous nature  of  response  Option  2  ( dating or involved with only  one  partner ).  This  option  can  cover  both  single

Table 1. Processing choices

1. Assessment of fertility (F)-high vs low.
2. (a) F1: high = cycle days 7-14; low = cycle days 17-25
3. (b) F2: high = cycle days 6-14; low = cycle days 17-27
4. (c) F3: high = cycle days 9-17; low = cycle days 18-25
5. (d) F4: high = cycle days 8-14; low = cycle days 1-7 and 15-28
6. (e) F5: high = cycle days 9-17; low = cycle days 1-8 and 18-28
2. Next menstrual onset (NMO)
8. (a) NMO1: reported start date previous menstrual onset + computed cycle length
9. (b) NMO2: reported start date previous menstrual onset + reported cycle length
10. (c) NMO3: reported estimate of next menstrual onset
3. Assessment of relationship status (R) (single vs relationship) (a) R1: single = response options 1 and 2; relationship = response options 3 and 4
12. (b) R2: single = response option 1; relationship = response options 2, 3, and 4
13. (c) R3: single = response option 1; relationship = response options 3 and 4
4. Exclusion of women based on cycle length (ECL)
15. (a) ECL1: no exclusion based on cycle length
16. (b) ECL2: exclusion of participants with computed cycle length greater than 25 or less than 35 days
17. (c) ECL3: exclusion of participants with reported cycle length greater than 25 or less than 35 days
5.   Exclusion of women based on certainty ratings of start dates of two previous menstrual periods (EC)
19. (a) EC1: no exclusion based on certainty ratings
20. (b) EC2: exclusion of participants who are not certain about at least one start date (i.e., sure less than 6)

women ( dating )  or  women  in  relationships  ( involved with only one partner ).  Thus,  women  who  select  this response could reasonably be classified as being either in  committed relationships or as being single. A third option involves discarding participants who select this ambiguous response option, and only classifying participants selecting Option 1 as single women, and participants selecting Option 3 or 4 as women in relationships.

Exclusion  criteria .  First,  it  is  not  unreasonable  to exclude  participants  with  irregular  cycle  lengths.  This could  amount  to  only  including  women  with  cycle lengths 25 to 35 (Durante et al., 2012). This exclusion criterion can be instantiated in two reasonable ways, using either a woman's computed cycle length or a woman's self-reported typical cycle length.

Second, another justifiable exclusion criterion concerns women's reported certainty ratings of the start dates of their last two menstrual periods. It is reasonable to exclude participants  who  were  not  sufficiently  confident  about

their report and to consider only data from participants with a certainty rating above the midpoint for both dates (Durante, Arsena, &amp; Griskevicius, 2014).

Based on this tabulation of choices, the multiverse of data sets is constructed by considering all combinations of reasonable choices in data processing and deriving a data set for each of the different choice combinations. In Study 1, there are 5 × 2 × 3 × 3 × 2 = 180 choice combinations (see  Table  1;  NMO3,  the  estimation  of  next  menstrual onset  based  on  the  reported  estimate,  could  not  be applied to Study 1, as the expected start date of the next menstrual period was not collected in this study). Some of the choice combinations are inconsistent: When participants are excluded based on reported or computed cycle length, we do not consider next menstrual onset based on computed  or  reported  cycle  length,  respectively.  After excluding  these  inconsistent  combinations,  we  are  left with 180 - 2 × (5 × 1 × 3 × 1 × 2) = 120 choice combinations. Similarly, in Study 2, there are 5 × 3 × 3 × 3 × 2 = 270 choice combinations, but after excluding inconsistent combinations, 270 - 2 × (5 × 1 × 3 × 1 × 2) = 210 choice combinations remain.

Fig. 1. Histogram of p values of the Fertility × Relationship status interaction on religiosity for the multiverse of 120 data sets in Study 1  and  210  data  sets  in  Study  2  (Panels  A  and  B),  on  fiscal  and  social  political  attitudes  for  the  multiverse  of  210  data  sets  in  Study  2  (Panels  C and D), and on voting and donation preferences for the multiverse of 210 data sets in Study 2 (Panels E and F). The dashed line indicates p = .05.

<!-- image -->

Deriving the multiverse of statistical results. After constructing the data multiverse, the analysis of interest (in this case, an ANOVA or a logistic regression) is performed across all the alternatively constructed data sets. 3 The results are shown in Panels A-F of Figure 1, each showing a histogram of the p values  of  the  Fertility  × Relationship interaction effect.

For two variables-religiosity in Study 1 (Panel A) and fiscal political attitudes (Panel C)-the multiverse analysis reveals a near-uniform distribution, indicating that the p value  for  the  interaction  effect  between  fertility  and relationship varies widely across the multiverse. For religiosity, 7 out of the 120 choice combinations lead to a significant interaction effect, whereas the remaining 94% lead to p values ranging from .05 to 1.0. For fiscal political attitudes, 8% of the 210 choice combinations lead to a significant interaction ( p &lt; .05), whereas the remaining choice combinations lead to p values  across  the  entire range from .05 to 1.0.

For  the  remaining  four  variables,  roughly  half  of  the choice combinations lead to a significant interaction effect. In particular, for religiosity in Study 2 (Panel B), 88 out of the  210  choice  combinations  (42%)  lead  to  a p value smaller than .05. Regarding social political attitudes (Panel D), 49% of the p values is smaller than .05. Finally, 46% and 57% of the p values are smaller than .05 for voting (Panel E) and donation (Panel F) preferences, respectively. In these cases, it is informative to display the multiverse in greater detail by showing which constellation of choices corresponds to which statistical result. This allows to identify the key choices in data processing that are most consequential in the fluctuation of the statistical results.

Such a closer inspection is provided in Figure 2, showing a grid of p values for each of these four variables. In each panel, the cells show the different p values that can be obtained across all choice combinations for data processing. Depending on whether the p value is smaller or larger than the α level, the cells are colored gray or white, respectively.  For  religiosity  in  Study  2  (Panel  A),  most data  sets  constructed  under  the  second  option  for relationship assessment (R2) yield a nonsignificant interaction effect. The first and third options (R1 and R3) consistently lead to a significant interaction effect in combination with the first and second option for fertility assessment (F1 and F2) and to a nonsignificant interaction  effect  in  combination  with  F5,  whereas  data  sets constructed under R1 or R3 in combination with F3 or F4 lead to more fluctuating conclusions, depending on the other choices for data processing. The different exclusion criteria and cycle day estimation options do not seem to have a large impact on fluctuation in the statistical conclusion. For social political attitudes (Panel B), the statistical conclusion is highly robust for the first and second option for relationship status assessment (significant for R1 and nonsignificant for R2). Using the third option for relationship status assessment (R3) leads to more fluctuation, depending on the choices for the other processing steps. Finally, for voting and donation preferences (Panels C and D, respectively), it is hard to extract a consistent pattern of fluctuation across the different choice combinations.  It  seems  that  all  arbitrary  choices  for  data processing can have an impact on whether the obtained data  set  will  lead  to  a  significant  or  a  nonsignificant outcome.

## Discussion

Converting a set of observations into a data set that is suitable for statistical analysis usually requires active data construction.  If  there  are  strong  grounds  to  justify  the necessary processing steps, the raw observations uniquely translate into a single data set for analysis. In many cases, however, the intermediate processing steps involve arbitrary or, as Leamer (1983) calls them, whimsical, choices, so that the single set of observations does not uniquely lead to a single data set. Rather, it spawns a multiverse of data sets and thus does not admit a unique conclusion. Yet, researchers often analyze, or at least report, only one (or a few) data sets that are the result of one (or a few) outcomes of this chain of arbitrary choices. To the extent their  single  data  set  is  based  on  arbitrary  processing choices, their statistical result is arbitrary. We suggest that, if several processing choices are defensible, researchers should perform a multiverse analysis instead of a single data set analysis. This involves considering all different reasonable data sets, except those arising under inconsistent choice combinations. A multiverse analysis is a way to  avoid  or  at  least  reduce  the  problem  of  selective reporting  by  making  the  fragility  or  robustness  of  the results transparent, and it helps the identification of the most consequential choices.

In our demonstration, we started from a single set of raw data and performed both a single data set analysis as well as a multiverse analysis. Comparison of both types of  analysis  highlights  the  dramatic  impact  of  going beyond an N = 1 sample from the multiverse. For religiosity in Study 1, the arbitrary data processing choices made in the single data set analysis led to a significant result. Placing this significant result in the multiverse of statistical results illustrates the risk of running a single data set analysis. The multiverse analysis revealed that almost all choice combinations for data processing lead to large p values. As such nonsignificant findings in general represent nothing more than uncertainty, this pattern of results clearly raises serious questions regarding the finding on the effect of fertility found in the single data set analysis,

Fig. 2. Visualization of the multiverse of p values of the Fertility × Relationship status interaction on religiosity (Panel A), on social political attitudes (Panel B), on voting preferences (Panel C), and on donation preferences (Panel D) in Study 2, showing the dependence of the results on data processing choices. See Table 1 for an explanation of the acronyms.

<!-- image -->

and should make a researcher hesitant to trust the single data set finding. The effect of fertility on religion seems too sensitive to arbitrary choices and thus too fragile to be taken seriously.

For most other variables, there was considerable ambiguity:  The  interaction  seemed  to  be  significant  across about half of the arbitrary choice combinations. In these cases,  the  conclusion  on  the  effect  of  fertility  strongly depends  on  the  evaluation  of  the  different  processing options. Both the authors performing the multiverse analysis  and  the  readers  of  the  research  can  construct  arguments in favor or against certain choices, and the validity of these arguments will help drawing the conclusion. For example, if additional information suggests that the fifth option of assessing fertility is clearly superior, then Panel A

of Figure 2 indicates that there is little evidence for an effect of fertility on religiosity in Study 2. On the other hand, if additional information suggests that the second option of assessing fertility is clearly superior, then most choice  combinations  lead  to  a  significant  interaction effect.

If  no  strong  arguments  can  be  made  for  certain choices, we are left with many branches of the multiverse that have large p values. In these cases, the only reasonable conclusion on the effect of fertility is that there is considerable  scientific  uncertainty.  One  should  reserve judgment and acknowledge that the data are not strong enough to draw a conclusion on the effect of fertility. The real conclusion of the multiverse analysis is that there is a  gaping  hole  in  theory  or  in  measurement,  and  that

researchers  interested  in  studying  the  effect  of  fertility should work hard to deflate the  multiverse. The multiverse analysis gives useful directions in this regard.

In general, deflating the multiverse involves developing a better and more complete theorizing of the constructs of interest and improving their measurement. Both routes for deflating the multiverse are illustrated in our case  study.  A  first  approach  involves  improving  the experimental  material  and  design.  For  example,  the detailed  multiverse  examination  shown  in  Figure  2 revealed that a lot of fluctuation hinged on the different choices for relationship status assessment. Thus, apparently,  this  type  of  research  could  benefit  from  a  better way of assessing relationship status. Looking at the alternative options for assessing relationship status, it seems that  the  ambiguous Option 2 in the relationship status question  could  be  formulated  more  precisely,  so  that relationship status assessment is no longer an arbitrary choice. This would have narrowed down the multiverses to  40  and  70  choice  combinations  in  Study  1  and  2, respectively.

A second approach for deflating the multiverse involves  developing  more  complete  and  more  precise theory in such a way that some options are theoretically superior  than  others,  and  it  should  be  preferred  when constructing data sets. For example, a great deal of variation in the results appeared to be driven by the different options  for  assessing  fertility.  Clearly,  for  this  type  of research, developing and applying a more precise way of assessing fertility should become a research priority. The availability of different reasonable options for estimating next menstrual onset or for classifying women into a high or low fertility group based on their cycle day stems from the fact that a precise theoretical foundation is lacking (Harris, 2013). The development of elaborated theories concerning these issues would narrow down the number of  alternative  options  and  deflate  fluctuation.  Recently, Gangestad et al. (2016) have recommended assessing fertility based on the detection of surges in luteinizing hormone, ideally in a within-subjects design. It is of note that this alternative strategy of assessing fertility was used in several  papers  by  Durante  (e.g.,  Durante  et  al.,  2011; Durante et al., 2012).

Preregistration  (e.g.,  Chambers,  2013;  Wagenmakers et al., 2012) or blind analysis (e.g., MacCoun &amp; Perlmutter, 2015) are not useful strategies for deflating the multiverse. By preregistering a study, all analytical choices-including the arbitrary ones-are made ahead of time, before collecting the data. Similarly, in a blind analysis, all analytical choices  are  made  using  a  data  set  with  temporarily removed data labels. The appeal of both strategies is that the  choices  cannot  be  made  conditional  on  the  (real) data.  However,  the  considered  results  are  still  just  the results given one choice combination, albeit preregistered or blindly made, and their robustness across other reasonable choice alternatives remains hidden from view. Thus, preregistration or blind analysis do not preclude a multiverse analysis, as they do not annihilate the arbitrariness in data preparation.

As  is  evident  from  our  demonstration,  a  multiverse analysis is highly context-specific and inherently subjective. Listing the alternative options for data construction requires judgment about which options can be considered reasonable and will typically depend on the experimental design, the research question, and the researchers performing the research. Whereas this subjectivity may seem undesirable, presenting results given only a single combination of reasonable options is  much  more  misleading; indeed, one of the sources of the current crisis in scientific replication is that researchers traditionally have taken p values at face value without considering the multiplicity of choices in data construction.

A related point is that not all options are necessarily exactly interchangeable. Some options might seem better than others, at least for some researchers. If such is the case, this knowledge can be used to construct arguments for interpreting results such as those shown in Figure 2. However, a multiverse analysis should involve all plausible construction alternatives, not just the most plausible ones. When only one choice is clearly and unambiguously  the  most  appropriate  one,  variation  across  this choice is uninformative.

The richness of possibilities for different data processing choices present in the raw data made the case study exceptionally suitable for the demonstration of a multiverse analysis. We do not expect that all multiverses will consist of such a numerous amount of data sets. The fact that more typical multiverses will tend to be smaller does not make a multiverse analysis less necessary. Even when confronted  with  only  one  arbitrary  data  processing choice,  researchers  should  be  transparent  about  it  and reveal the sensitivity of the result to this choice.

We aimed to show the multiverse analysis we think Durante et al. (2013) could have done, instead of their single data set analysis. As their single data set analysis used p values, our demonstration of the multiverse analysis did too. There is, however, nothing inherently special about p values from a multiverse perspective. Increasing transparency in reporting through a multiverse analysis is valuable,  regardless  of  the  inferential  framework  (frequentist or Bayesian), and regardless of the specific way uncertainty is quantified: a p value, an effect size, a confidence (Cumming, 2013) or credibility (Kruschke, 2010) interval, or a Bayes factor (Morey &amp; Rouder, 2011).

The primary goal of a multiverse analysis is to enhance research  transparency.  Unlike,  for  example,  a p -curve

analysis (Simonsohn, Nelson, &amp; Simmons, 2014), it is not a formal test of questionable research practices, such as selective reporting, or a method to estimate the strength of  the  evidence  for  an  effect.  The  multiverse  analysis does not produce a single value summarizing the evidential value of the data, nor does it imply a threshold for an effect to reach to be declared robustly significant. Nevertheless, one might try to summarize the multiverse analysis more formally. One reasonable first step is to simply average the p values in the multiverse, in this case averaging all the numbers displayed in Figure 1 or 2. This mean value can be considered as the p value of a hypothetical  preregistered  study  with  conditions  chosen  at random  among  the  possibilities  in  the  multiverse  and seems like a fair measurement in a setting where all of the possible data processing choices seem plausible (as in  the  example  presented  here,  where  the  different options  are  drawn  from  other  papers  in  the  relevant literature).

We have focused on the multiverse of statistical results originating  from  the  data  multiverse  (i.e.,  the  different reasonable choices in data processing). We have ignored arbitrary choices occurring at the level of statistical models  used  in  data  analysis.  Choices  at  the  model  level include choosing among different statistical approaches (e.g., a repeated-measures ANOVA or a hierarchical linear  model),  focusing  on  main  effects  or  interactions, approximating errors normally, assuming random effects, assuming homoscedasticity, assuming linearity, choosing between a parametric and a non-parametric approach, and so on. One specific analysis thus corresponds to a single sample from a model multiverse . If the choice for a single model specification out of the model multiverse cannot be justified, a model multiverse analysis can be performed to reveal the effect of this arbitrary choice on the statistical result.

A compelling example of such a model multiverse is provided in Patel, Burford, and Ioannidis (2015), focusing on the choices in deciding which predictors and covariates  to  include.  Such  a  model  multiverse  analysis  is related  to perturbation analysis (Geisser,  1993)  and  to sensitivity analysis in economics (e.g., Leamer, 1985) and in Bayesian statistics (e.g., Kass &amp; Raftery, 1995), all of which  involve  investigating  the  influence  of  arbitrary modeling  assumptions  on  the  results,  such  as  using  a normal error distribution or a t distribution, the inclusion of different variables, or using different reasonable priors. In a more complete analysis, the multiverse of data sets could be crossed with the multiverse of models to further reveal the multiverse of statistical results. Thus, the multiverse analysis as demonstrated here is a minimal attempt at  establishing  a  range  of  analyses  consistent  with  a research hypothesis. To the extent that there are arbitrary choices  not  only  in  data  preparation  but  also  in  data analysis  or  model  choice,  this  motivates  encompassing analyses of multiple predictors, interactions, or outcomes in a hierarchical model so as to reduce problems of multiple comparisons (Gelman, Hill, &amp; Yajima, 2012).

Our demonstration of the multiverse analysis should serve as a cautionary tale. We hope it raises awareness that,  in  the  light  of  the  multiverse  of  statistical  results, isolating a single statistical result stemming from a chain of arbitrary choices can be highly misleading. Readers of research need to get a sense of the sensitivity of conclusions to arbitrary decisions in data preparation and thus of  the  fragility  or  robustness  of  a  claimed  effect.  We believe  that  it  should  become  standard  practice  to  go beyond a single data set analysis and to acknowledge the multiverse of statistical results. Admittedly, performing a multiverse analysis will often be difficult, and to a large extent subjective, but that does not change the fact that it is a necessary step for increasing transparency.

## Acknowledgments

We thank Kristina Durante for making the data and the survey material available and for helpful clarifications. Richard Morey and Don van den Bergh provided valuable suggestions. The data and the code can be found on https://osf.io/zj68b/.

## Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.

## Funding

The research leading to the results reported in this paper was supported  in  part  by  the  Research  Fund  of  KU  Leuven (GOA/15/003) and by the Interuniversity Attraction Poles Programme financed by the Belgian government (IAP/P7/06).

## Supplemental Material

Additional supporting information may be found at http://pps .sagepub.com/content/by/supplemental-data

## Notes

1. For one of the six analyses of interest, Durante et al. (2013) report an additional analysis that uses a continuous measure of fertility-conception probability-rather than the dichotomized one,  maybe  inspired  by  these  criticisms  (see  also  Gangestad et al., 2016). However, since the majority of their analyses uses a dichotomized assessment of fertility, we will do so here as well. 2. The fact that typical cycle length and the expected start date of  the  next  period  were  collected  by  Durante  et  al.  (2013) suggests  that  they  considered  this  option  at  least  somewhat reasonable.

3.  Due  to  coding  errors  in  the  data,  there  were  some  missing data (see online Supplemental Materials for details). In our analyses, incomplete cases are discarded.

## References

- Asendorpf,  J.  B.,  Conner,  M.,  De  Fruyt,  F.,  De  Houwer,  J., Denissen,  J.  J.,  Fiedler,  K.,  .  .  .  Wicherts,  J.  M.  (2013). Recommendations  for  increasing  replicability  in  psychology. European Journal of Personality , 27 , 108-119.
- Bakker, M., van Dijk, A., &amp; Wicherts, J. M. (2012). The rules of the game called psychological science. Perspectives on Psychological Science , 7 , 543-554.
- Chambers, C. D. (2013). Registered reports: A new publishing initiative at cortex. Cortex , 49 , 609-610.
- Cumming, G. (2013). Understanding the new statistics:  Effect sizes, confidence intervals, and meta-analysis . New York, NY: Routledge.
- Durante, K. M., &amp; Arsena, A. R. (2015). Playing the field: The effect of fertility on women's desire for variety. Journal of Consumer Research , 41 , 1372-1391.
- Durante, K. M., Arsena, A. R., &amp; Griskevicius, V. (2014). Fertility can have different effects on single and nonsingle women: Reply to Harris and Mickes (2014). Psychological Science , 25 , 1150-1152.
- Durante, K. M., Griskevicius, V., Cantú, S. M., &amp; Simpson, J. A. (2014). Money, status, and the ovulatory cycle. Journal of Marketing Research , 51 , 27-39.
- Durante,  K.  M.,  Griskevicius,  V.,  Hill,  S.  E.,  Perilloux,  C.,  &amp; Li, N. P. (2011). Ovulation, female competition, and product  choice:  Hormonal  influences  on  consumer  behavior. Journal of Consumer Research , 37 , 921-934.
- Durante, K. M., Griskevicius, V., Simpson, J. A., Cantú, S. M., &amp;  Li,  N.  P.  (2012).  Ovulation  leads  women  to  perceive sexy cads as good dads. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 103 , 292-305.
- Durante, K. M., Rae, A., &amp; Griskevicius, V. (2013). The fluctuating female vote: Politics, religion, and the ovulatory cycle. Psychological Science , 24 , 1007-1016.
- Gangestad, S. W., Haselton, M. G., Welling, L. L., Gildersleeve, K., Pillsworth, E. G., Burriss, R. P., . . . Puts, D. A. (2016). How  valid  are  assessments  of  conception  probability in  ovulatory  cycle  research?  Evaluations,  recommendations,  and  theoretical  implications. Evolution  &amp;  Human Behavior , 37 , 85-96.
- Geisser, S. (1993). Predictive inference: An introduction . New York, NY: Chapman &amp; Hall.
- Gelman,  A.,  Hill,  J.,  &amp;  Yajima,  M.  (2012).  Why  we  (usually) don't have to worry about multiple comparisons. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness , 5 , 189-211.
- Gelman, A., &amp; Loken, E. (2014). The statistical crisis in science. American Scientist , 102 , 460-465.
- Harris, C. R. (2013). Shifts in masculinity preferences across the menstrual cycle: Still not there. Sex Roles , 69 , 507-515.
- Harris,  C.  R.,  Pashler,  H.,  &amp;  Mickes,  L.  (2014).  Elastic  analysis  procedures:  An  incurable  (but  preventable)  problem in the fertility effect literature. Comment on Gildersleeve, Haselton,  and  Fales  (2014). Psychological  Bulletin , 140 , 1260-1264.
- Haselton, M. G., &amp; Miller, G. F. (2006). Women's fertility across the cycle increases the short-term attractiveness of creative intelligence. Human Nature , 17 , 50-73.
- John, L. K., Loewenstein, G., &amp; Prelec, D. (2012). Measuring the prevalence of questionable research practices with incentives for truth telling. Psychological Science , 23 , 524-532.
- Johnson, V. E. (2013). Revised standards for statistical evidence. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA , 110 , 19313-19317.
- Kass, R. E., &amp; Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 90 , 773-795.
- Kruschke, J. K. (2010). What to believe: Bayesian methods for data analysis. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 14 , 293-300.
- Leamer, E. E. (1983). Let's take the con out of econometrics. The American Economic Review , 73 , 31-43.
- Leamer,  E.  E.  (1985).  Sensitivity  analyses  would  help. The American Economic Review , 75 , 308-313.
- LeBel, E. P., Campbell, L., &amp; Loving, T. J. (in press). Benefits of open and high-powered research outweigh costs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .
- MacCallum, R. C., Zhang, S., Preacher, K. J., &amp; Rucker, D. D. (2002). On the practice of dichotomization of quantitative variables. Psychological Methods , 7 , 19-40.
- MacCoun,  R.,  &amp;  Perlmutter,  S.  (2015).  Blind  analysis:  Hide results to seek the truth. Nature , 526 , 187-189.
- Morey,  R.  D.,  Chambers,  C.  D.,  Etchells,  P.  J.,  Harris,  C.  R., Hoekstra, R., Lakens, D., . . . Zwaan, R. A. (2016). The peer reviewers' openness initiative: Incentivizing open research practices through peer review. Royal Society Open Science , 3 (1), 150547. doi:10.1098/rsos.150547
- Morey, R. D., &amp; Rouder, J. N. (2011). Bayes factor approaches for testing interval null hypotheses. Psychological Methods , 16 , 406-419.
- Nosek, B. A., Alter, G., Banks, G., Borsboom, D., Bowman, S., Breckler,  S.,  .  .  .  Yarkoni,  T.  (2015).  Promoting  an  open research culture: Author guidelines for journals could help to  promote  transparency,  openness,  and  reproducibility. Science , 348 , 1422-1425.
- Nosek,  B.  A.,  &amp;  Bar-Anan,  Y.  (2012).  Scientific  utopia:  I. Opening scientific communication. Psychological Inquiry , 23 , 217-243.
- Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science, 349 , aac4716.
- Patel, C. J., Burford, B., &amp; Ioannidis, J. P. (2015). Assessment of vibration of effects due to model specification can demonstrate the instability of observational associations. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology , 68 , 1046-1058.
- Ramsey,  F.,  &amp;  Schafer,  D.  (2012). The  statistical  sleuth:  A course in methods of data analysis (3rd ed.). Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning.
- Simmons,  J.  P.,  Nelson,  L.  D.,  &amp;  Simonsohn,  U.  (2011). False-positive  psychology:  Undisclosed  flexibility  in  data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychological Science , 22 , 1359-1366.
- Simmons,  J.  P.,  Nelson,  L.  D.,  &amp;  Simonsohn,  U.  (2012). A 21 word  solution . Retrieved from http://papers.ssrn. com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract\_id=2160588. doi:10.2139/ ssrn.2160588
- Simonsohn, U., Nelson, L. D., &amp; Simmons, J. P. (2014). P-curve: A key to the file-drawer. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 143 , 534-547.

- Thornhill, R., &amp; Gangestad, S. W. (1999). The scent of symmetry: A human sex pheromone that signals fitness? Evolution &amp; Human Behavior , 20 , 175-201.
- Wagenmakers,  E.-J.,  Wetzels,  R.,  Borsboom,  D.,  &amp;  van  der Maas,  H.  L.  (2011).  Why  psychologists  must  change  the way they analyze their data: The case of psi: Comment on Bem (2011). Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 100 , 426-432.
- Wagenmakers, E.-J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., van der Maas, H. L., &amp; Kievit, R. A. (2012). An agenda for purely confirmatory research. Perspectives on Psychological Science , 7 , 632-638.
- Yong,  E.  (2012).  In  the  wake  of  high  profile  controversies, psychologists are facing up to problems with replication. Nature , 483 , 298-300.